Procedural Macros in Rust 2018 (#348)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2018-12-21-Procedural-Macros-in-Rust-2018.md

  about anything!
* Procedural macros are incorporated with the module system, meaning no more
  janky `#[macro_use]`

Before we take a look at implementing a procedural macro, let's first dive into
some of these points.

### Macros and the module system

First stabilized in [Rust 1.30] \(noticing a trend with 1.15?\) macros are now
integrated with the module system in Rust. This mainly means that you no longer
need the clunky `#[macro_use]` attribute when importing macros! Instead of this:

```rust
#[macro_use]
extern crate log;

fn main() {
    debug!("hello, ");
    info!("world!");
}
```

you can do:

```rust
use log::info;

fn main() {
    log::debug!("hello, ");
    info!("world!");
}
```

Integration with the module system solves one of the most confusing parts about
macros historically. They're now imported and namespaced just as you would any
other item in Rust!

The benefits are not only limited to bang-style `macro_rules` macros, as you can
now transform code that looks like this:

```rust
#[macro_use]
extern crate serde_derive;

#[derive(Deserialize)]
struct Foo {
    // ...
}
```

into

```rust

> #[derive(serde::Deserialize)]

Author: Ah yeah I originally had this but ended up using the path in `#[derive]`, am fine deferring though!

like "the `Ident` token` foo` came from file `bar.rs`, line 4, column 5, and was
3 bytes long". This information is primarily used by the compiler's diagnostics
with warnings and error messages.

In Rust 2018 each [`TokenTree`] has a [`Span`] associated with it. This means that
if you preserve the [`Span`] of all input tokens into the output then even
though you're producing brand new syntax the compiler's error messages are still
accurate!

For example, a small macro like:

```rust
#[proc_macro]
pub fn gen_fn(expr: TokenStream) -> TokenStream {
    let result = quote! {
        fn the_function() -> u32 { #expr }
    };
    result.into()
}
```

when invoked as:

```rust
my_macro::gen_fn!("foo");
```

is invalid because we're returning a string from a function that should return a
`u32`, and the compiler will helpfully diagnose the problem as:

```
error[E0308]: mismatched types
 --> src/main.rs:1:19
  |
1 | my_macro::gen_fn!("foo");
  | ------------------^^^^^--
  | |                 |
  | |                 expected u32, found reference
  | expected `u32` because of return type
  |
  = note: expected type `u32`

>              found type `&'static str`

Reviewer: This feels like not the *best* example perhaps -- it's somewhat an opaque error message. Perhaps there's something a little more nice-looking?

Author: Sure thing, I've pushed up a tweak

```

And we can see here that although we're generating brand new syntax, the
compiler can preserve span information to continue to provide targeted
diagnostics about code that we've written.

### Procedural Macros in the Wild

> Ok up to this point we've got a pretty good idea about what proceduarl macros

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ok up to this point we've got a pretty good idea about what procedural macros
```

can do and the various capabilities they have in the 2018 edition. As such a
long-awaited feature, the ecosystem is already making use of these new
capabilities! If you're interested, some projects to keep your eyes on are:

* [`syn`][syn], [`quote`], and [`proc-macro2`] are your go-to libraries for
  writing procedural macros. They make it easy to define custom parsers, parse
  existing syntax, create new syntax, work with older versions of Rust, and much
  more!

* [Serde] and its derive macros for `Serialize` and `Deserialize` are likely the
  most used macros in the ecosystem. They sport an [impressive amount of
  configuration][serde-attr] and are a great example of how small annotations
  can be so powerful.

* The [`wasm-bindgen` project][wbg] uses attribute macros to easily define
  interfaces in Rust and import interfaces from JS. The `#[wasm_bindgen]`
  lightweight annotation makes it easy to understand what's coming in and out,
  as well as removing lots of conversion boilerplate.

> * The [`gobject_gen!` macro][gnome-class] is an experimental IDL for defining

Author: Indeed!

  GObject objects safely in Rust, eschewing manually writing all the glue
  necessary to talk to C and interface with other GObject instances in Rust.

* The [Rocket framework][rocket] has recently switched over to procedural
  macros, and showcases some of nightly-only features of procedural macros like
  custom diagnostics, custom span creation, and more. Expect to see these

>   features stabilize in 2019 most likely!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  features stabilize in 2019!
```

---
layout: post
title: "Procedural Macros in Rust 2018"
author: Alex Crichton
---

Perhaps my favorite feature in the Rust 2018 edition is [procedural macros].
Procedural macros have had a long and storied history in Rust (and will continue
to have a storied future!), and now is perhaps one of the best times to get
involved with them because the 2018 edition has so dramatically improved the
experience both defining and using them.

Here I'd like to explore what procedural macros are, what they're capable of,
notable new features, and some fun use cases of procedural macros. I might even
convince you that this is Rust 2018's best feature as well!

### What is a procedural macro?

First defined over two years ago in [RFC 1566], procedural macros are, in
layman's terms, a function that takes a piece of syntax at compile time and
produces a new bit of syntax. Procedural macros in Rust 2018 come in one of
three flavors:

* **`#[derive]` mode macros** have actually been stable since [Rust 1.15]
  and bring all the goodness and ease of use of `#[derive(Debug)]` to
  user-defined traits as well, such as [Serde]'s `#[derive(Deserialize)]`.

> * **Function-like macros** are new to the 2018 edition and allow defining

Reviewer 2: Perhaps newly-stable rather than new since they've been around since pre-1.0

> * **Procedural bang macros** are new to the 2018 edition and allow defining

Author: Nah I just can't ever remember the name, I should use [what we wrote in the reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/procedural-macros.html)!

  macros like `env!("FOO")` or `format_args!("...")` in a crate.io-based
  library. You can think of these as sort of "`macro_rules!` macros" on
  steroids.

> * **Procedural attribute macros**, my favorite, are also new in the 2018 edition

Reviewer 3: In this case "-like" is unnecessary, they are not similar to attributes, they *are* attributes.
(I have deja vu that I wrote exactly this already, on some doc PR.)

> * **Procedural attribute macros**, my favorite, are also new in the 2018 edition

Author: Ah I'm gonna stick [with the reference terminology](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/procedural-macros.html) for "attribute macros"

  and allow you to provide lightweight annotations on Rust functions which
  perform syntactical transformations over the code at compile time.

Each of these flavors of macros can be defined in a crate with `proc-macro =
true` [specified in its manifest][manifest]. When used, a procedural macro is
loaded by the Rust compiler and executed as the invocation is expanded. This
means that Cargo's in control of versioning for procedural macros and you can
use them with all same ease of use you'd expect from other Cargo dependencies!

### Defining a procedural macro

Each of the three types of procedural macros are [defined in a slightly different
fashion][proc-ref], and here we'll single out attribute macros. First we'll flag
`Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[lib]
proc-macro = true
```

and then in `src/lib.rs` we can write our macro:

```rust
extern crate proc_macro;
use proc_macro::TokenStream;

#[proc_macro_attribute]
pub fn hello(attr: TokenStream, item: TokenStream) -> TokenStream {
    // ...
}
```

We can then write some unit tests in `tests/smoke.rs`:

```rust

> #[my_crate::hello]

Author: I don't particularly have a preference either way, but I figured this was a good opportunity to show this off at least.

fn wrapped_function() {}

#[test]
fn works() {
    wrapped_function();
}
```

... and that's it! When we execute `cargo test` Cargo will compile our
procedural macro. Afterwards it will compile our unit test which loads the macro
at compile time, executing the `hello` function and compiling the resulting
syntax.

Right off the bat we can see a few important properties of procedural macros:

* The input/output is this fancy `TokenStream` type we'll talk about more in a
  bit
* We're *executing aribtrary code* at compile time, which means we can do just
  about anything!
* Procedural macros are incorporated with the module system, meaning no more

>   janky `#[macro_use]`

Reviewer 2: I would phrase this positively rather than negatively, e.g., "meaning they can be used just like functions and types"

Before we take a look at implementing a procedural macro, let's first dive into
some of these points.

### Macros and the module system

First stabilized in [Rust 1.30] \(noticing a trend with 1.15?\) macros are now
integrated with the module system in Rust. This mainly means that you no longer
need the clunky `#[macro_use]` attribute when importing macros! Instead of this:

```rust
#[macro_use]
extern crate log;

fn main() {
    debug!("hello, ");
    info!("world!");
}
```

you can do:

```rust
use log::info;

fn main() {
    log::debug!("hello, ");
    info!("world!");
}
```

Integration with the module system solves one of the most confusing parts about
macros historically. They're now imported and namespaced just as you would any
other item in Rust!

The benefits are not only limited to bang-style `macro_rules` macros, as you can
now transform code that looks like this:

```rust
#[macro_use]
extern crate serde_derive;

#[derive(Deserialize)]
struct Foo {
    // ...
}
```

into

```rust
use serde::Deserialize;

#[derive(Deserialize)]
struct Foo {
    // ...
}
```

> and you don't even need to explicitly depend on `serde_derive` in `Cargo.toml`!

Reviewer 2: It's maybe worth expanding on this and showing what you do need in Cargo.toml

### What's inside a `TokenStream`?

This mysterious `TokenStream` type comes from the [compiler-provided
`proc_macro` crate][pm]. When it was first added all you could do with a

> [`TokenStream`] was call `to_string()` or `parse()` one back from a string.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[`TokenStream`] was call convert it to or from a string using `to_string()` or `parse()`.
```

> As of Rust 2018, the [`TokenStream`] type provides a much larger stable API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of Rust 2018, you can act on the tokens in a [`TokenStream`] directly.
```

As its name might imply, a `TokenStream` can be thought of as a stream of
tokens, or a list of tokens. Each token is called a [`TokenTree`] and represents

> one of four kinds of tokens:

Reviewer 2: I would replace the first half of this para with "A `TokenStream` is effectively "just" an iterator over `TokenTree`." from below. And perhaps move "All syntax in Rust falls into one of the above four categories." here too

* `Literal` include things like `1`, `"foo"`, and `'b'`. All literals are one
  token and represent constant values in a program.
* `Punct` represents some form of punctuation that's not a delimiter. For
  example `.` is a `Punct` token in the field access of `foo.bar`.
  Multi-character punctuation like `=>` is represented as two `Punct` tokens,
  one for `=` and one for `>`, and the `Spacing` enum says that the `=` is
  adjacent to the `>`.
* `Group` is where the term "tree" is most relevant, as `Group` represents a
  delimited sub-token-stream. For example `(a, b)` is a `Group` with parentheses
  as delimiters, and the internal token stream is `a, b`.

All syntax in Rust falls into one of the above four categories. A `TokenStream`
is effectively "just" an iterator over `TokenTree`.

While this is conceptually simple, this may sound like there's not much we can
do with this! It's unclear, for example, how we might parse a function from a
`TokenStream`. The minimality of `TokenTree` is crucial, however, for
stabilization. It would be infeasible to stabilize the Rust AST because that
means we could never change it. (imagine if we couldn't have added the `?`
operator!)

> By using `TokenStream` to communicate with procedural macros the compiler is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By using `TokenStream` to communicate with procedural macros, the compiler is
```

> able to add new syntactical language features while also being able to compile

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
able to add new language syntax while also being able to compile
```

required to be valid Rust syntax, but like the input it's just list of tokens
that we need to build somehow.

Technically the only way to create a `TokenStream` is via its `FromIterator`
implementation, which means we'd have to create each token one-by-one and
collect it into a `TokenStream`. This is quite tedious, though, so let's take a
look at [`syn`][syn]'s sibling crate: [`quote`].

The [`quote`] crate is a quasi-quoting implementation for Rust which primarily
provides a convenient macro for us to use:

```rust
use quote::quote;

#[proc_macro_attribute]
pub fn hello(attr: TokenStream, item: TokenStream) -> TokenStream {
    let input = syn::parse_macro_input!(item as syn::ItemFn);
    let name = &input.ident;

    // Our input function is always equivalent to returning 42, right?
    let result = quote! {
        fn #name() -> u32 { 42 }
    };
    result.into()
}
```

The [`quote!` macro] allows you to write mostly-Rust syntax and interpolate
variables quickly from the environment with `#foo`. This removes much of the
tedium of creating a `TokenStream` token-by-token and allows quickly cobbling
together various pieces of syntax into one return value.

### Tokens and `Span`

> Perhaps the greatest feature of procedural macros in Rust 2018 is the ability to

Reviewer 2: I would lead with what spans let you do (give good error messages) and come to what spans actually are second.
